 The American Revolutionary War (1775–1783), also known as the American War of Independence, was a global war that began as a conflict between Great Britain and its Thirteen Colonies which declared independence as the United States of America.
After 1765, growing philosophical and political differences strained the relationship between Great Britain and its colonies.
Patriot protests against taxation without representation followed the Stamp Act and escalated into boycotts, which culminated in 1773 with the Sons of Liberty destroying a shipment of tea in Boston Harbor.
Britain responded by closing Boston Harbor and passing a series of punitive measures against Massachusetts Bay Colony.
Massachusetts colonists responded with the Suffolk Resolves, and they established a shadow government which wrested control of the countryside from the Crown.
Twelve colonies formed a Continental Congress to coordinate their resistance, establishing committees and conventions that effectively seized power.
British attempts to disarm the Massachusetts militia in Concord led to open combat on April 19, 1775.
Militia forces then besieged Boston, forcing a British evacuation in March 1776, and Congress appointed George Washington to command the Continental Army.
Concurrently, an American attempt to invade Quebec and raise rebellion against the British failed decisively.
On July 2, 1776, the Continental Congress voted for independence, issuing its declaration on July 4.
Sir William Howe launched a British counter-offensive, capturing New York City and leaving American morale at a low ebb.
However, victories at Trenton and Princeton restored American confidence.
In 1777, the British launched an invasion from Quebec under John Burgoyne, intending to isolate the New England Colonies.
Instead of assisting this effort, Howe took his army on a separate campaign against Philadelphia, and Burgoyne was decisively defeated at Saratoga in October 1777.
Burgoyne's defeat had drastic consequences.
France formally allied with the Americans and entered the war in 1778, and Spain joined the war the following year as an ally of France but not as an ally of the United States.
In 1780, the Kingdom of Mysore attacked the British in India, and tensions between Great Britain and the Netherlands erupted into open war.
In North America, the British mounted a "Southern strategy" led by Charles Cornwallis which hinged upon a Loyalist uprising, but too few came forward.
Cornwallis suffered reversals at King's Mountain and Cowpens.
He retreated to Yorktown, Virginia, intending an evacuation, but a decisive French naval victory deprived him of an escape.
A Franco-American army led by the Comte de Rochambeau and Washington then besieged Cornwallis' army and, with no sign of relief, he surrendered in October 1781.
Whigs in Britain had long opposed the pro-war Tories in Parliament, and the surrender gave them the upper hand.
In early 1782, Parliament voted to end all offensive operations in North America, but the war continued in Europe and India.
Britain remained under siege in Gibraltar but scored a major victory over the French navy.
On September 3, 1783, the belligerent parties signed the Treaty of Paris in which Great Britain agreed to recognize the sovereignty of the United States and formally end the war.
French involvement had proven decisive, but France made few gains and incurred crippling debts.
Spain made some minor territorial gains but failed in its primary aim of recovering Gibraltar.
The Dutch were defeated on all counts and were compelled to cede territory to Great Britain.
In India, the war against Mysore and its allies concluded in 1784 without any territorial changes.
Parliament passed the Stamp Act in 1765.
Colonists condemned the tax because their rights as Englishmen protected them from being taxed by a Parliament in which they had no elected representatives.
Parliament argued that the colonies were "represented virtually", an idea that was criticized throughout the Empire.
Parliament did repeal the act in 1766; however, it also affirmed its right to pass laws that were binding on the colonies.
From 1767, Parliament began passing legislation to raise revenue for the salaries of civil officials, ensuring their loyalty while inadvertently increasing resentment among the colonists, and opposition soon became widespread.
Enforcing the acts proved difficult.
The seizure of the sloop Liberty in 1768 on suspicions of smuggling triggered a riot.
In response, British troops occupied Boston, and Parliament threatened to extradite colonists to face trial in England.
Tensions rose after the murder of Christopher Seider by a customs official in 1770 and escalated into outrage after British troops fired on civilians in the Boston Massacre.
In 1772, colonists in Rhode Island boarded and burned a customs schooner.
Parliament then repealed all taxes except the one on tea, passing the Tea Act in 1773, attempting to force colonists to buy East India Company tea on which the Townshend duties were paid, thus implicitly agreeing to Parliamentary supremacy.
The landing of the tea was resisted in all colonies, but the governor of Massachusetts permitted British tea ships to remain in Boston Harbor.
So, the Sons of Liberty destroyed the tea chests, an incident that later became known as the "Boston Tea Party".
Parliament then passed punitive legislation.
It closed Boston Harbor until the tea was paid for and revoked the Massachusetts Charter, taking upon themselves the right to directly appoint the Massachusetts Governor's Council.
Additionally, the royal governor was granted powers to undermine local democracy.
Further measures allowed the extradition of officials for trial elsewhere in the Empire, if the governor felt that a fair trial could not be secured locally.
The act's vague reimbursement policy for travel expenses left few with the ability to testify, and colonists argued that it would allow officials to harass them with impunity.
Further laws allowed the governor to billet troops in private property without permission.
The colonists referred to the measures as the "Intolerable Acts", and they argued that both their constitutional rights and their natural rights were being violated, viewing the acts as a threat to all of America.
The acts were widely opposed, driving neutral parties into support of the Patriots and curtailing Loyalist sentiment.
The colonists responded by establishing the Massachusetts Provincial Congress, effectively removing Crown control of the colony outside Boston.
Meanwhile, representatives from twelve colonies[59][60] convened the First Continental Congress to respond to the crisis.
The Congress narrowly rejected a proposal to create an American parliament to act in concert with the British Parliament; instead, they passed a compact declaring a trade boycott against Britain.
The Congress also affirmed that Parliament had no authority over internal American matters, but they were willing to consent to trade regulations for the benefit of the empire, and they authorized committees and conventions to enforce the boycott.
The boycott was effective, as imports from Britain dropped by 97% in 1775 compared to 1774.
Parliament refused to yield.
In 1775, it declared Massachusetts to be in a state of rebellion and enforced a blockade of the colony.
It then passed legislation to limit colonial trade to the British West Indies and the British Isles.
Colonial ships were barred from the Newfoundland cod fisheries, a measure which pleased Canadiens but damaged New England's economy.
These increasing tensions led to a mutual scramble for ordnance and pushed the colonies toward open war.
Thomas Gage was the British Commander-in-Chief and military governor of Massachusetts, and he received orders on April 14, 1775 to disarm the local militias.
On April 18, 1775, 700 troops were sent to confiscate militia ordnance stored at Concord.
Fighting broke out, forcing the regulars to conduct a fighting withdrawal to Boston.
Overnight, the local militia converged on and laid siege to Boston.
On May 25, 4,500 British reinforcements arrived with generals William Howe, John Burgoyne, and Henry Clinton.
The British seized the Charlestown peninsula on June 17 after a costly frontal assault,[72][73] leading Howe to replace Gage.
Many senior officers were dismayed at the attack, which had gained them little, while Gage wrote to London stressing the need for a large army to suppress the revolt.
On July 3, George Washington took command of the Continental Army besieging Boston.
Howe made no effort to attack, much to Washington's surprise.
A plan was rejected to assault the city, and the Americans instead fortified Dorchester Heights in early March 1776 with heavy artillery captured from a raid on Fort Ticonderoga.
The British were permitted to withdraw unmolested on March 17, and they sailed to Halifax, Nova Scotia.
Washington then moved his army to New York.
Starting in August 1775, American Privateers began to raid villages in Nova Scotia, first at Saint John, then Charlottetown and Yarmouth.
They continued in 1776 at Canso and then a land assault on Fort Cumberland.
Meanwhile, British officials in Quebec began lobbying Indian tribes to support them, while the Americans urged them to maintain their neutrality.
In April 1775, Congress feared an Anglo-Indian attack from Canada and authorized an invasion of Quebec.
Quebec had a largely Francophone population and had been under British rule for only 12 years, and the Americans expected that they would welcome being liberated from the British.
The Americans attacked Quebec City on December 31 after an arduous march but were defeated.
After a loose siege, the Americans withdrew on May 6. 1776.
A failed counter-attack on June 8 ended American operations in Quebec.
However, the British could not conduct an aggressive pursuit because of American ships on Lake Champlain.
On October 11, the British defeated the American squadron, forcing them to withdraw to Ticonderoga and ending the campaign.
The invasion cost the Patriots their support in British public opinion, while aggressive anti-Loyalist policies diluted Canadien support.
The Patriots continued to view Quebec as a strategic aim, though no further attempts to invade were ever made.
In Virginia, Royal governor Lord Dunmore had attempted to disarm the militia as tensions increased, although no fighting broke out.
He issued a proclamation on November 7, 1775 promising freedom for slaves who fled their Patriot masters to fight for the Crown.
Dunmore's troops were overwhelmed by Patriots at Great Bridge, and Dunmore fled to naval ships anchored off Norfolk.
Subsequent negotiations broke down, so Dunmore ordered the ships to destroy the town.
Fighting broke out on November 19 in South Carolina between Loyalist and Patriot militias, and the Loyalists were subsequently driven out of the colony.
Loyalists were recruited in North Carolina to reassert colonial rule in the South, but they were decisively defeated and Loyalist sentiment was subdued.
A troop of British regulars set out to reconquer South Carolina and launched an attack on Charleston on June 28, 1776, but it failed and effectively left the South in Patriot control until 1780.
The shortage of gunpowder had led Congress to authorize an expedition against the Bahamas colony in the British West Indies in order to secure ordnance there.
On March 3, 1776, the Americans landed after a bloodless exchange of fire, and the local militia offered no resistance.
They confiscated all the supplies that they could load and sailed away on March 17.
The squadron reached New London, Connecticut on April 8, after a brief skirmish with the Royal Navy frigate HMS Glasgow on April 6.
After fighting began, Congress launched a final attempt to avert war, which Parliament rejected as insincere.
King George then issued a Proclamation of Rebellion on August 23, 1775, which only served to embolden the colonists in their determination to become independent.
After a speech by the King, Parliament rejected coercive measures on the colonies by 170 votes.
British Tories refused to compromise, while Whigs argued that current policy would drive the colonists towards independence.
Despite opposition, the King himself began micromanaging the war effort.
The Irish Parliament pledged to send troops to America, and Irish Catholics were allowed to enlist in the army for the first time.
Irish Protestants favored the Americans, while Catholics favored the King.
The initial hostilities provided a sobering military lesson for the British, causing them to rethink their views on colonial military capability.
The weak British response gave the Patriots the advantage, and the British lost control over every colony.
The army had been deliberately kept small in England since 1688 to prevent abuses of power by the King.
Parliament secured treaties with small German states for additional troops and sent an army of 32,000 men to America after a year, the largest that it had ever sent outside Europe at the time.
In the colonies, the success of Thomas Paine's pamphlet Common Sense had boosted public support for independence.
On July 2, Congress voted in favor of independence with twelve affirmatives and one abstention, issuing its declaration on July 4.
Washington read the declaration to his men and the citizens of New York on July 9, invigorating the crowd to tear down a lead statue of the King and melting it to make bullets.
British Tories criticized the signatories for not extending the same standards of equality to slaves.
Patriots followed independence with the Test Laws, requiring residents to swear allegiance to the state in which they lived, intending to root out neutrals or opponents to independence.
Failure to do so meant possible imprisonment, exile, or even death.
American Tories were barred from public office, forbidden from practising medicine and law, forced to pay increased taxes, or even barred from executing wills or becoming guardians to orphans.
Congress enabled states to confiscate Loyalist property to fund the war.
Some Quakers who remained neutral had their property confiscated.
States later prevented Loyalists from collecting any debts that they were owed.
After regrouping at Halifax, William Howe determined to take the fight to the Americans.
He set sail in June 1776 and began landing troops on Staten Island near the entrance to New York Harbor on July 2.
Due to poor military intelligence, Washington split his army to positions on Manhattan Island and across the East River in western Long Island, and an informal attempt to negotiate peace was rejected by the Americans.
On August 27, Howe outflanked Washington and forced him back to Brooklyn Heights.
Howe restrained his subordinates from pursuit, opting to besiege Washington instead.
Washington withdrew to Manhattan without any losses in men or ordnance.
Following the withdrawal, the Staten Island Peace Conference failed to negotiate peace, as the British delegates did not possess the authority to recognize independence.
Howe then seized control of New York City on September 15, and unsuccessfully engaged the Americans the following day.
He attempted to encircle Washington, but the Americans successfully withdrew.
On October 28, the British fought an indecisive action against Washington, in which Howe declined to attack Washington's army, instead concentrating his efforts upon a hill that was of no strategic value.
Washington's retreat left his forces isolated, and the British captured an American fortification on November 16, taking 3,000 prisoners and amounting to what one historian terms "the most disastrous defeat of the entire war".
Washington's army fell back four days later.
Henry Clinton then captured Newport, Rhode Island, an operation which he opposed, feeling that the 6,000 troops assigned to him could have been better employed in the pursuit of Washington.
The American prisoners were then sent to the infamous prison ships in which more American soldiers and sailors died of disease and neglect than died in every battle of the war combined.
Charles Cornwallis pursued Washington, but Howe ordered him to halt, and Washington marched away unmolested.
The outlook of the American cause was bleak; the army had dwindled to fewer than 5,000 men and would be reduced further when the enlistments expired at the end of the year.
Popular support wavered, morale ebbed away, and Congress abandoned Philadelphia.
Loyalist activity surged in the wake of the American defeat, especially in New York.
News of the campaign was well received in Britain.
Festivities took place in London, public support reached a peak, and the King awarded the Order of the Bath to William Howe.
The successes led to predictions that the British could win within a year.
The American defeat revealed what one writer views as Washington's strategic deficiencies, such as dividing a numerically weaker army in the face of a stronger one, his inexperienced staff misreading the situation, and his troops fleeing in disorder when fighting began.
In the meantime, the British entered winter quarters and were in a good place to resume campaigning.
On December 25, 1776, Washington stealthily crossed the Delaware River, and his army overwhelmed the Hessian garrison at Trenton, New Jersey the following morning, taking 900 prisoners.
The decisive victory rescued the army's flagging morale and gave a new hope to the cause for independence.
Cornwallis marched to retake Trenton, but his efforts were repulsed on January 2.
Washington outmanoeuvred Cornwallis that night, and defeated his rearguard the following day.
The victories proved instrumental in convincing the French and Spanish that the Americans were worthwhile allies, as well as recovering morale in the army.
Washington entered winter quarters at Morristown, New Jersey on January 6, though a protracted guerrilla conflict continued.
While encamped, Howe made no attempt to attack, much to Washington's amazement.

